There are the following differences between DBMS and File systems:

Basis	DBMS Approach	File System Approach
Meaning

DBMS is a collection of data. In DBMS, the user is not required to write the procedures.	The file system is a collection of data. 
In file  system, the user has to write the procedures for managing the database.

Sharing of data

Due to the centralized approach, data sharing is easy.	
Data is distributed in many files, and it may be of different formats, so it isn't easy to share data.

Data Abstraction	

DBMS gives an abstract view of data that hides the details.	
The file system provides the detail of the data representation and storage of data.

Security and Protection	
DBMS provides a good protection mechanism.	
It isn't easy to protect a file under the file system.

Recovery Mechanism	

DBMS provides a crash recovery mechanism, i.e., DBMS protects the user from system failure.	
The file system doesn't have a crash mechanism, i.e., if the system crashes while entering some data, then the content of the file will be lost.

Manipulation Techniques	

DBMS contains a wide variety of sophisticated techniques to store and retrieve the data.	
The file system can't efficiently store and retrieve the data.

Concurrency Problems	

DBMS takes care of Concurrent access of data using some form of locking.	
In the File system, concurrent access has many problems like redirecting the file while deleting some information or updating some information.

Where to use	

Database approach used in large systems which interrelate many files.	
File system approach used in large systems which interrelate many files.

Cost	

The database system is expensive to design.	
The file system approach is cheaper to design.

Data Redundancy and Inconsistency	

Due to the centralization of the database, the problems of data redundancy and inconsistency are controlled.	
In this, the files and application programs are created by different programmers so that there exists a lot of duplication of data which may lead to inconsistency.

Structure	

The database structure is complex to design.	
The file system approach has a simple structure.

Data Independence

In this system, Data Independence exists, and it can be of two types.
Logical Data Independence
Physical Data Independence
In the File system approach, there exists no Data Independence.

Integrity Constraints	

Integrity Constraints are easy to apply.	Integrity Constraints are difficult to implement in file system.
Data Models	In the database approach, 3 types of data models exist:
Hierarchal data models
Network data models
Relational data models
In the file system approach, there is no concept of data models exists.

Flexibility	

Changes are often a necessity to the content of the data stored in any system, and these changes are more easily with a database approach.	The flexibility of the system is less as compared to the DBMS approach.

Examples	

Oracle, SQL Server, Sybase etc.	
Cobol, C++